


     prms(1)          U.S. Geological Survey (wrdapp)          prms(1)


     NAME
            prms - Precipitation-Runoff Modeling System

     ABSTRACT
            PRMS is a modular-design, deterministic, distributed-parameter
            modeling system developed to evaluate the impacts of various
            combinations of precipitation, climate, and land use on streamflow,
            sediment yields, and general basin hydrology.  Basin response to
            normal and extreme rainfall and snowmelt can be simulated to
            evaluate changes in water-balance relationships, flow regimes, flood
            peaks and volumes, soil-water relationships, sediment yields, and
            ground-water recharge.  Parameter-optimization and sensitivity
            analysis capabilities are provided to fit selected model parameters
            and evaluate their individual and joint effects on model output.
            The modular design provides a flexible framework for continued
            model-system enhancement and hydrologic-modeling research and
            development.

     METHOD
            A watershed is divided into subunits based on such basin
            characteristics as slope, aspect, elevation, vegetation type, soil
            type, land use, and precipitation distribution.  Two levels of
            partitioning are available. The first divides the basin into
            homogeneous response units (HRU) based on the basin characteristics.
            Water and energy balances are computed daily for each HRU.  The sum
            of the responses of all HRU's, weighted on a unit-area basis,
            produces the daily system response and streamflow for a basin.  A
            second level of partitioning is available for storm hydrograph
            simulation.  The watershed is conceptualized as a series of
            interconnected flow planes and channel segments.  Surface runoff is
            routed over the flow planes into the channel segments; channel flow
            is routed through the watershed channel system.  An HRU can be
            considered the equivalent of a flow plane or it can be delineated
            into a number of flow planes.

     HISTORY
            1991 version - Added option to output computed time series to the
               Watershed Data Management (WDM) file

            1984 version - A WDM file replaces the ISAM file for the time-series
               data management

            1983 version - Original version

     DATA REQUIREMENTS
            For daily streamflow computations, a minimum of daily precipitation
            and daily maximum and minimum air temperature are required.  For
            snowmelt computations, daily short-wave solar radiation data are
            recommended.  For areas without snowmelt, daily pan evaporation data
            can be substituted for temperature data.  For storm hydrograph and
            sediment computations, short time-interval precipitation,
            streamflow, and sediment data are needed.  Physical descriptive data
            on the topography, soils, and vegetation are input for each
            watershed subunit.  The spatial and temporal variation of



                                01 May 1996                          1





     prms(1)          U.S. Geological Survey (wrdapp)          prms(1)


            precipitation, temperature and solar radiation are also needed.  The
            input time-series data are read from a WDM file.

     OUTPUT OPTIONS
            The observed (if available) and predicted mean daily discharge for
            the basin is output in tabular form.  Annual and monthly summaries
            of precipitation, interception, potential and actual
            evapotranspiration, and inflows and outflows of the ground water and
            subsurface reservoirs are available.  The time series available at a
            monthly time step may also be output at a daily time step along with
            the available soil moisture, percent snow cover, pack water
            equivalent, and snowmelt.  Most of the computed daily time series
            can also be written to the WDM file.  This information is also
            available for the individual HRU's.  A summary table of observed and
            predicted peak flows and runoff volumes for each storm period is
            output in tabular form. The inflow and outflow for user selected
            overland flow plans and channel segments can be output in tabular
            form, as "printer" plots, or to the WDM file.

     SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
            UNIX-based computers (supported:  Data General AViiON and Sun
            SPARCstation).

            DOS-based computers having a math coprocessor and 4 mb of memory
            (supported: IBM-compatible computers with a 386 or greater
            processor).

            PRMS is written in Fortran.  Generally, it is easily installed on
            other platforms.

     DOCUMENTATION
            Leavesley, G.H., Lichty, R.W., Troutman, B.M., and Saindon, L.G.,
               1983, Precipitation-Runoff Modeling System: User's Manual:  U.S.
               Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-4238,
               207 p.

     RELATED DOCUMENTATION
            Flynn, K.M., Hummel, P.R., Lumb, A.M., and Kittle, J.L., Jr., 1995,
               User's manual for ANNIE, version 2, a computer program for
               interactive hydrologic data management:  U.S. Geological Survey
               Water-Resources Investigations Report 95-4085, 211 p.

     REFERENCES
            Carey, W.P., and Simon, A., 1984, Physical basis and potential
               estimation techniques for soil erosion parameters in the
               Precipitation-Runoff Modeling System (PRMS):  U.S. Geological
               Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 82-4218, 32 p.

            Cary, L.E., 1984, Application of the U.S. Geological Survey's
               Precipitation-Runoff Modeling System to the Prairie Dog Creek
               basin, Southeastern Montana: U.S. Geological Survey Water-
               Resources Investigations Report 84-4178, 98 p.





                                01 May 1996                          2





     prms(1)          U.S. Geological Survey (wrdapp)          prms(1)


            Kidd, R.E., and Bossong, C.R., 1987, Application of the
               precipitation-runoff model in the Warrior Coal Field, Alabama:
               U.S. Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 2036, 42 p.

            Kuhn, G., 1989, Application of the U.S. Geological Survey's
               Precipitation-Runoff Modeling System to Williams Draw and Bush
               Draw basins, Jackson County, Colorado:  U.S. Geological Survey
               Water-Resources Investigations Report 88-4013, 38 p.

            Norris, J.M., and Parker, R.S., 1985, Calibration procedure for a
               daily flow model of small watersheds with snowmelt runoff in the
               Green River coal region of Colorado:  U.S. Geological Survey
               Water-Resources Investigations Report 83-4263, 32 p.

            Parker, R.S., and Norris, J.M., 1989, Simulation of streamflow in
               small drainage basins in the southern Yampa River Basin,
               Colorado:  U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations
               Report 88-4071, 47 p.

            Puente, C., and Atkins, J.T., 1989, Simulation of rainfall-runoff
               response in mined and unmined watersheds in coal areas of West
               Virginia:  U.S. Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 2298, 48 p.

            Scott, A.G., 1984, Analysis of characteristics of simulated flows
               from small surface-mined and undisturbed Appalachian watersheds
               in the Tug Fork basin of Kentucky, Virginia, and West Virginia:
               U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report
               84-4151, 169 p.

     TRAINING
            Watershed Systems Modeling I (G0083), offered annually at the USGS
            National Training Center.

     CONTACTS
            Operation and Distribution:
               U.S. Geological Survey
               Hydrologic Analysis Software Support Team
               Kate Flynn
               437 National Center
               Reston, VA 22092

               h2osoft@usgs.gov

            Latest version by anonymous ftp from:
                  h2o.usgs.gov
                  /pub/software/surface_water/prms

     SEE ALSO
            annie - Program to list, table, plot data in a WDM file
            iowdm - Program to store time-series data in a WDM file
            wdm - Watershed Data Management system






                                01 May 1996                          3


